# HA (High-Adjust) Tie Rods
The files in this directory consist of all the components required to fabricate an outer tie rod (tie rod end) for the 350Z platform.

This is a somewhat novel design.  The shank component is inserted into the spindle and is secured by one flanged M12x1.25 nut (STEP file included under "Nuts", ISO standard).  This nut should be torqued to *at least* 34Nm in accordance to the FSM.  It is the opinion of some manufacturers that this is not enough torque, but without further testing I cannot take an educated stance.  One of the features of this design is a vertical, unthreaded section above the conical seat that extends to approximately one millimetre below the surface of the spindle.  This _should_ prevent catastrophic failure from over-torquing, but it is *NOT* a target, nor should it be relied on to prevent this.  There is a groove cut above the thread to house an 8mm E or C clip to prevent steering loss in the even that the retaining nut should fail.  It is *critical* that a thread locking compound is used with this retaining nut - "blue" strength compounds are recommended.  I recommend using the threaded misalignment spacers as jam nuts to torque down the retaining bolt.

*IMPORTANT NOTE* - The 350Z spindle is made from aluminium.  Over-torquing of the shank MAY result in the conical seat being dragged through the spindle receptacle, snapping it in half.  Older vehicles that have undergone many fatigue cycles (or have had replacement tie rod ends installed "enthusiastically" in the past) may have weakened receptacles.  Aluminium does not have a fatigue limit - any load applied will result in cumulative damage.  For all aluminium parts, failure is "when" and not "if".  For this reason, as of writing I recommend using the torque specification listed in the FSM (34Nm) and applying threadlocker.  Please check that this nut remains secure at several occasions less than 100 miles post-install, for the safety of yourself and others.

The turnbuckle is longer than most aftermarket offerings (as far as I am aware) at 95mm.  This is with the intention of ensuring maximum strength and thread engagement, but some edge cases may not be compatible.  If this is the case for you, the turnbuckle can be shortened by the requisite amount from the end housing the M14 thread in CAD.  One end is threaded for M14x1.5 - the thread diameter and pitch of the 350Z inner tie rods.  The other is threaded for M16x2.0.  Most 16mm-eye metric rod-end bearings on the market are build to this specification, as was the case for my chosen bearing; the SKF SAKAC 16M.  I encourage end users to use serviceable components - bearing coatings do not last forever and greasing them instead at your yearly inspection is easily done.  An M16x2.0 jam nut (ISO-4035 spec recommended) is required to "lock" the rod-end in to the turnbuckle.  A STEP file is provided under "Nuts".

The final components are the so-called "threaded misalignment spacers".  These are what make this kit "high-adjust".  There are two nuts - the top is thinner, the bottom thicker.  Both have an 18 degree chamfer on the flat face of one side.  The top nut is threaded on first with the chamfer on the underside.  This is followed by installing the rod-end bearing onto the 16mm shaft.  Finally, the bottom nut is installed with the chamfer on the topside (against the bearing).  These two nuts can then be adjusted to change the position of the rod-end bearing, which in turn will affect your steering geometry and "bump steer".  To eliminate bump steer to the best of your ability, ensure that your tie rods sit parallel with your lower control arms when the car is sat at ride height.  I do not yet know how far offset the bearing should be from the bottom of the spindle for a stock vehicle, but respected manufacturers (SPL) have it listed at half an inch, so I would start around there (18mm seems to be a close equivalent in comparison).  These documents will be updated when I have a more concrete measurement.

The TMS's do not have a torque spec other than *tight*.  Threadlocker is, once again, critical for safety.  Use it on the bottom TMS, even if you don't on the top.  In my case, SKF does not list a maximum compressive force for their bearings, and my material of choice was Grade 5 Titanium so I will be targeting 75Nm.  The only risk you face is deforming the bearing or shearing the shank in half.  Proceed with care!  Other radial loads in the suspension area (brake caliper bolts, for example) are secured with bolts set to 88.3Nm, and the compression arms are secured at 84.5Nm.  Keep in mind that any inferences I make from that are purely "vibes-based", but that level of torque _feels_ suitable.

Addendum: The reason for the chamfer on the TMS's is to allow for maximum bearing misalignment.  The SAKAC 16M that I'm using has a rated misalignment of 15 degrees, so I made the chamfers at 18 degrees to allow the nuts to handily clear the bearing race.

## Material Choices
As previously mentioned, I used Grade 5 Titanium when making mine.  Other manufacturers have used 4000-grade alloy steels for theirs, and I can only assume that Nissan does something similar.  In the FEA that I carried out, I saw a single stress concentrator at or exceeding 950Mpa on the shank with the worst conditions imaginable (excessive pressure, unrealistic and enormous torque arm).  This is almost certainly an FEA artifact, but without further testing I can't confirm anything.  As such, I would err on the side of caution and use a material that exceeds 500Mpa.  I wouldn't expect loads to exceed even 200Mpa when used with under realistic installation conditions, but again, this is all theoretical.  Be safe and err on the side of caution.